(introduction)=
# Introduction, purpose and scope

Land surface water fraction (SWF) is key for understanding the global water cycle, influencing hydrology, climate, and ecosystems. Changes in SWF, driven by factors like rainfall {cite:p}`Sun2011`, snowmelt {cite:p}`Watts2012`, droughts and floods {cite:p}`Komi2017`, are essential for various applications, from water management {cite:p}`SanchezCarrillo2004` to disease control {cite:p}`Chuang2012`. Precise and reliable surface water quantification is needed for agricultural planning, and climate change mitigation efforts. Traditional observational methods have offered limited solutions, either constrained by temporal resolution or compromised by environmental factors such as vegetation cover and soil moisture {cite:p}`Brakenridge2006,Prigent2007`.

Characterizing SWF spatial and temporal dynamics may help to reduce uncertainty in land surface parameters obtained through microwave remote sensing, including soil moisture, temperature and vegetation optical depth, an index quantifying the extent to which vegetation blocks or attenuates microwave signals passing through it {cite:p}`Jones2010`. The Copernicus Imaging Microwave Radiometer (CIMR) SWF product will facilitate the continuation of long-term records as the global Surface Water Microwave Product Series (SWAMPS, {cite:p}`Schroeder2014`).

Satellite remote sensing, using optical-IR and microwave (active/passive) sensors, is needed for high-resolution hydrological mapping, particularly in inaccessible areas. Optical-IR remote sensing is typically effective in classifying water bodies with high spatial precision, in the range of tens to hundreds of meters. Despite its utility, monitoring global surface water dynamics using satellite optical-IR sensors is challenged by various factors, such as degradation of signals and loss of data due to low solar azimuth angles, seasonal decrease in sunlight at higher latitudes, vegetation obstructing water detection, and interference from clouds, smoke, and atmospheric aerosols {cite:p}`Du2016`. To overcome these limitations, active microwave remote sensing has been extensively utilized for SWF detection {cite:p}`Schroeder2014`. However, the use of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) sensors for global SWF monitoring faces limitations due to the limited global coverage and frequency of acquisitions {cite:p}`Du2016`.

In contrast, moderate frequency microwave observations of brightness temperature (TB) from polar-orbiting satellites, like AMSR-E, show a high sensitivity to surface water and a low sensitivity to solar illumination and atmospheric contamination. This capability enables monitoring with high temporal resolution (approximately daily), which is particularly useful for observing dynamic water changes at latitudes above 45°N. The amount of surface water within the detection area of a satellite passive microwave sensor greatly impacts the sensor capability for accurate SWF detection and retrieval {cite:p}`Watts2012`. As a result, a larger sampling area is needed to achieve an appropriate signal-to-noise ratio, which is an advantage of microwave radiometers when compared to optical-infrared or Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) sensors. The spatial resolution of microwave radiometric TB retrievals varies with the sensor's frequency. For instance, the spatial resolutions of AMSR-E observations range from about 5 km to 56 km, depending on the frequency.

This document introduces and explains the method proposed for estimating Surface Water Fraction (SWF) from CIMR K-band (18.7 GHz) microwave signal. The K-band provides higher spatial resolution compared to the L-, C-, and X-bands. However, it is more sensitive to atmospheric conditions and vegetation, particularly in densely vegetated areas. Both the K- and Ka-bands meet the ≤15 km spatial resolution requirement. Therefore, the choice of the K-band represents a trade-off between spatial resolution and the accuracy of the SWF retrievals, given its relatively lower sensitivity to vegetation and weather effects compared to the Ka-band. The method involves two key steps: initially, it constructs a Lookup Table (LUT) that reflects emissivity under various soil moisture (SM) levels and vegetation coverage (Vegetation Optical Depth or VOD) based on a global land parameter data record (LPDR, {cite:p}`Du2017`). Following this, the SWF for each image pixel is determined through a technique known as the h-pol Difference Ratio (DR), based in the research by Du et al. {cite:p}`Du2016,Du2017,Du2018`.

Below, we reproduce the CIMR MRD requirements that directly describe the variables addressed in the current ATBD.

```{admonition} Surface Water Fraction ([RD-1](./01_applicable_ref_docs) MRD-1060)

CIMR shall generate L2 products of surface water fraction over land (SWF) at a spatial resolution of ≤15 km with a standard total uncertainty of ≤10% and daily coverage.

Notes:
1. This requirement addresses SEC-OBJ-10 in [RD-1](./01_applicable_ref_docs).
2. Channels that can measure surface water extent include 18.7 and 36.5 GHz, both polarizations.
3. As a Secondary Objective, this requirement does not drive the instrument design.

```